the first time you dive on a site you
don't really know what to expect
[Music]
it's this magical discovery moment where
you tingle all over and what I try to
imagine is if it wasn't on earth where
would it be
[Music]
what could this system represent in
terms of understanding life on other
planets as well as early life on Earth
[Music]
in the Gulf of Mexico there are hundreds
of Brian Poole ecosystems we've explored
less than 10 what we've learned is that
every single one is unique and that
means the microbiology is unique and
could have very very real potential for
biotechnology and medical use
we're just getting underway in the Gulf
of Mexico where I first began diving in
the 1950s our destinations to visit
remarkable places there as Brian fools
lakes of highly saline water actually
over the ocean
[Music]
we're diving into the history of life on
earth we have the technology to access
the deep sea and know about the life
that is here my name is Gavin Thurston
and I'm a director of photography don't
be shooting here in the submarine
yo come on venting now venting now
[Applause]
[Music]
we're passing through the twilight zone
where the sunlight fades into the
eternal darkness most of life on Earth
lives in the dark all the time the
number of creatures that just float past
that nobody has ever seen it's almost
like they're from another planet
[Music]
as our light slowly light up the brine
pool you could see a ring of mussels
living around the edge of this pond this
Parliament has got a misty layer on the
top almost like a which is called him
it's an amazingly diverse complex
ecosystem and you're watching it
interact right in front of you through
six inches of acrylic you could see
these high fish and things swimming
through this landscape is just
extraordinary the hagfish are just
prehistoric they've been around for tens
to hundreds of millions of years they're
the only animal that I've ever seen dive
into the deepest parts of that brine and
come out and not be faced
[Music]
we filmed quite a few fish just dying
before our eyes because they've made the
mistake of dipping into the brine
but the hagfish will dive in and
actually feed on these dead fish without
being affected by the salinity of the
brine there's more diversity of life in
the deep seabed than there is in
tropical rainforests the bacteria that
live in these Brian pools may hold cures
to diseases it's really important that
we study them and understand them
[Music]
the seafloor is in a barren desert it's
so incredibly alive and it's connected
to the surface the greatest era of
exploration is still ahead of us but we
know enough to know that we're
vulnerable to what we do to the earth we
can see what we could not understand
before exploring a place like this can
help provide peace to the big puzzle
it's quite extraordinary to think that
in the next five or ten years they're
planning to send a spaceship up to Mars
with people in it in a way you think of
why are we so excited by traveling to
Mars when under our feet we've got
things we've never seen before this is
more than just exploration there's a
very high probability that there are
payoffs above and beyond just the basic
science biomedical cures for disease
those kinds of payoffs we can't put a
price tag on those and the fact that
we've got ecosystems that have been
barely explored and are being damaged by
human activity means that we're losing
stuff before we even know that is there
[Music]
you